# Git Tutorial Notes

## What is a Version Control System?

A Version Control System (VCS) at a high-level is simply a collaboration tool. You've probably used web-based collaboration tools like Google Docs or Google Drive. These tools are very useful for items such as documents or presentations. However, when it comes to writing and compiling code, you'd most likely want to be able to download and have this code on your local computer, so that you can run and see if your software application works as you expect. A big part of studying computer science and building software is collaborating with other people. Version control systems are the preferred collaboration tools of computer scientists and software engineers, because it allows them to work together to build software while also allowing each person to write their own pieces of code and test it on their preferred development environment.

The basis of VCS is recording changes to files, known as diffs. You can think of these diffs as a snapshot of the changes made to a file from one point in time to another. To generate a diff, a user must commit their code in its current state. If two users are working on the same file, they can each commit their code and then the VCS can help them merge their changes together by comparing the diffs generated by each user. The goal of using a VCS is to minimize the number of conflicts and accidental erasures / overwriting of code. If a change causes issues to the project, VCS allows users to revert their files back to a previous snapshot, based on the diffs.

*Show what a diff looks like on Github*

## What is Git?

There are many different types of version control systems. After all, these are software systems that often get bundled / compiled into packages or binaries and installed on computers to be run as programs with certain commands. One of the most popular version control systems is Git.

Git was developed by Linus Torvalds, the creator of the Linux kernel, which is open-source and powers many operating systems today. The main goal of Git was to allow for non-linear development. Two users could start at the same snapshot and work on the same file at the same time (a.k.a. branching off from each other), without interfering with each other's changes. Git then easily allowed these two users to merge their changes afterwards.

In order to Git to work as intended, projects had to be enclosed in a collection called a repository. All files and folders pertaining to a project are maintained in this repository and Git has snapshots for any time any of these files and folders have changed. Think of it as a gigantic folder itself, in which everything inside of it is carefully monitored. Big Brother is watching.

Similar VCS include SVN, Mercurial, Perforce, and Piper, which is Google's own in-house version control to maintain their 2 billion-plus lines of code.

## What is Github?

[Github](http://github.com) is a company that offers cloud services to store git repositories. It is widely used by individuals and organizations alike to maintain different software projects. In particular, Github is incredibly popular with open-source software.

Github, along with storing repositories, also gives project management tools to help better facilitate collaboration. These tools include issue tracking, project wikis, and a concept called forking, see [Collaborative Workflows](#Collaborative Workflows).

You can also host static websites on Github. You can learn more about that at [Github Pages](https://pages.github.com/).

## How do you use Git/Github?

One way to use Git/Github is to download the [Github Desktop client](http://desktop.github.com). Another way is to download git and use a terminal to run git commands. For WCS, we'll be doing the latter way.

## Individual Workflow

For your own individual projects, there are 3 separate entities that are linked together when you run git commands. There's your code on your own local machine. There's a local repository, again stored on your local machine that keeps track of all of the local changes or commits that have been made. And then there's the cloud repository stored on Github that fetches the local changes and stores them in the cloud.

You'll create a new repository on Github. For simplicity, we recommend checking the README box. This makes it an easier workflow.

`git clone <repository url>` fetches the repository from the cloud and makes a local repository on your computer, as well as downloads the actual files. You can add files, edit files, yada yada yada.

`git status` lets you see the changes you've made so far. If the change is red, it means it's unstaged, meaning that there isn't a local snapshot of that change yet in your local repository.

`git add <files>` stages your local files to be committed to your local repository. At this point, `git status` should show a green change. This means that this change hasn't been pushed to the cloud repository.

`git commit` commits these local files (a.k.a. generates the diffs).

`git push` pushes these local commits (or diffs) to the cloud repository.

`git pull` updates your local repository with the latest diffs from the cloud repository, as well as your local copy of the code with all of the latest files.

## Collaborative Workflows

The first workflow is the branching workflow. Every single git repository will have a master branch. You can think of a branch as a certain path of changes and all of the commits can be seen as markers placed down on that path. Sometimes, two or more people want to work on the same project. It's important to not have the files interfere. It's also good practice to keep the master branch clean, meaning that code on the master branch is the most stable for the software to run on. There should be no major glaring bugs. Therefore, to work on different features, users should create branches from the master branch and then merge their changes back into the master branch when they are ready.

The second workflow is the fork/clone/pull-request workflow. Sometimes, your changes to a project are more involved than just a branch or there might be a lot of people working on the same project. Github allows you to fork a project from the master repository (which is most often controlled by an organization) to your own Github repository under your own Github account. Your changes are therefore completely independent from the changes of the master repository. You can then make your changes, make sure that your changes can be merged into the original repository without affecting the original repository and make a pull request. The organization controlling the repository can then look at your pull request and make comments or suggestions. Finally, they can then decide to merge your pull request into the organization's master repository.

## Tutorial
Here's a breakdown of what we did at the tutorial:

1. Log into your Github account that you just made.
2. Search for IllinoisWCS and find the organization in the Users panel.
3. Click on our organization and search for git-skeleton.
4. Click on the git-skeleton repository. Now this is the copy on the IllinoisWCS organization so we don't want to affect it if we don't have to. So let's fork the repository (it's all the way near the top right).
5. Now you should have it forked to your own account. You should see [your username]/git-skeleton.
6. Find the green Clone or download button and click on it. Copy paste the URL given.
7. Open a Terminal. Run `git clone [url you just pasted]`.
8. This created a folder called `git-skeleton` in your home directory. Let's change our directory from our home directory into `git-skeleton` by running `cd git-skeleton`.
9. There is a file called `README.md`. Open that file in your favorite text editor (any will do) and add your name after the first line of text.
10. Save and close that file. Return to the terminal. Run `git status`. You should now see a message with a red line saying `modified: README.md`. You're now ready to stage your file to commit.
11. To stage your README change for committing to the local repository, type `git add .`.
12. Now, let's run `git status` again. You should now see some more default messages with a green line saying `modified: README.md`. Your change has been staged! Now you're ready to commit.
13. Run `git commit -m "some message of your choosing"`. This creates the snapshot that we discussed. It's like a stamp in history. Your change has been committed!.
14. Now if you run `git status` again, you should see some messages about how your branch is 1 commit ahead of `origin/master`. This means, the cloud repository does not yet have your change. Your local repository does. We need to sync the two now.
15. Run `git push`. Refresh the Github repository web page and you should now see your change reflected in the README.md file. Hooray! You've pushed your first commit to Github!
16. Now, to complete the final step, let's create a pull request. Click on the button New Pull Request. This will then take you to an overview page where you can see the pull request details with all of the changes. Click Create Pull Request and then add a title and comment. And then click the green Create Pull Request button.
17. Nice work! Now you've successfully edited a file, put it through all of the version control steps and made a pull request to IllinoisWCS. Expect an invitation from us to join the organization as a member soon :)
18. P.S. If you're wondering how your operating system / terminal knows that a folder is actually a git repository, go back to the terminal and type `ls -la`. You'll see a hidden `.git` folder. This indicates to the operating system that your folder is actually a git repository. Inside that folder is all sorts of magic storing the snapshots that you create along the way with your commits.

Git is one of the most popular and widely used version control systems in industry and academia. Knowing this skill is really handy when working with other people on projects and eventually on products in industry or research projects in academia. Now, you know the basics! You'll be ready to get started on your own project soon!